README.md, before:

# Compiler for JFLAP Turing Machine

This final project consists in using the **Flex/Bison (Lex/Yacc)** toolkit to generate compilers that,
themselves, will generate code from an imperative language called **Provol-One**, to be executed in a Turing
Machine. The TMs are generated according to a XML dialect that will be interpreted by the **JFLAP Java
application**. The macros contained in the XML file will work as a sort of runtime system to run the
generated code, that can be aimed either for TMs with a single tape or for TMs with multiple tapes - it
is totally up to the group to decide. In fact, the goal of this project is to apply the concepts learned
on the Lexical and Syntactic Analysis (INF1022) course, lectured by the professor Edward Hermann Haeusler.

*(Free translation from the project statement originally in Portuguese)*

## Getting Started

In order to have of the project running on your machine, you must install the **Flex** and **Bison** packages.
Also, you might want to install **JDK** in order to run the JFLAP application.

``` bash
sudo yum install flex.x86_64
sudo yum install bison.x86_64
sudo yum install java-1.8.0-openjdk
```

Then you can easily compile the code by making use of the Makefile.

``` bash
make
```

In order to launch the JFLAP application, simply run:

``` bash
java -jar JFLAPX.X.jar
```

## Running the parser/compiler

From the repository root, you may run the parser/compiler as follows:

``` bash
./bin/provolone [file]
```

The argument is optional. If no argument is given, the parser will simply
read from standard input.

## Running tests

The tests text files are located on the `tests` folder. You can run them
by providing their path as an argument to the parser. As a stylistic choice,
Provol-One scripts are labelled with the .p1 extension. For example:

``` bash
./bin/provolone txt/simple.p1
```

This should output:

```
Variable parsed: X.
Variable parsed: Y.
Variable parsed: Z.
Increment X parsed.
Command parsed.
If parsed (if Y).
Command parsed.
Increment Y parsed.
Command parsed.
If else parsed (if X).
Command parsed.
Increment Z parsed.
Command parsed.
For loop parsed (X times).
Commands parsed.
Zero-ing X parsed.
Commands parsed.
Increment X parsed.
Command parsed.
If parsed (if X).
Command parsed.
Attribution X = Y parsed.
Commands parsed.
While loop parsed (while Z is true).
Commands parsed.
Program parsed.
```

## Code Style Standard

* Indent with 2 spaces (configurable on text editor)
* Underscores may be added to improve readability
* Function and variables names should be lower case

``` c
double get_circumference (double radius);
```

* Constants names should be upper case

``` c
#define PI 3.1415f
// or
double PI = 3.1415;
```

* Open code blocks on the following line

``` c
if( get_circumference(radius) == 0 )
{
  exit(1);
}
```

* One-liners are allowed if to improve conciseness

``` c
if( get_circumference(radius) == 0 ) exit(1);
```

* Document functions as follow

``` c
// Opens file for read only access
// file_name - file relative path
// > file pointer, NULL
// [!] if an error occurs, file will not
// be opened and NULL will be returned
FILE * read_file (const char * file_name);
```

## Project Information

* [Hermann *(Course Supervisor)*](http://www-di.inf.puc-rio.br/~hermann/)
* [Statement *(in Portuguese)*](https://drive.google.com/file/d/185EW11LlP18a115te7fuPol0oz6TyTKs/view?usp=sharing)

## Software Dependencies

* [JFLAP *(Java Application)*](http://www.jflap.org/jflaptmp/)

Commit message:

README: specified Makefile is in the 'src' folder
Also added $ at the beggining of every bash command

README.md, after:

# Compiler for JFLAP Turing Machine

This final project consists in using the **Flex/Bison (Lex/Yacc)** toolkit to generate compilers that,
themselves, will generate code from an imperative language called **Provol-One**, to be executed in a Turing
Machine. The TMs are generated according to a XML dialect that will be interpreted by the **JFLAP Java
application**. The macros contained in the XML file will work as a sort of runtime system to run the
generated code, that can be aimed either for TMs with a single tape or for TMs with multiple tapes - it
is totally up to the group to decide. In fact, the goal of this project is to apply the concepts learned
on the Lexical and Syntactic Analysis (INF1022) course, lectured by the professor Edward Hermann Haeusler.

*(Free translation from the project statement originally in Portuguese)*

## Getting Started

In order to have of the project running on your machine, you must install the **Flex** and **Bison** packages.
Also, you might want to install **JDK** in order to run the JFLAP application. For the following installations,
you'll be prompted with a y/N question - answer with 'y', for yes.

``` bash
$ sudo yum install flex.x86_64
$ sudo yum install bison.x86_64
$ sudo yum install java-1.8.0-openjdk
```

Then you can easily compile the code by making use of the Makefile that resides on the `src` folder.

``` bash
$ cd src
$ make
```

In order to launch the JFLAP application, simply run:

``` bash
$ java -jar JFLAPX.X.jar
```

## Running the parser/compiler

From the repository root, you may run the parser/compiler as follows:

``` bash
$ ./bin/provolone [file]
```

The argument is optional. If no argument is given, the parser will simply
read from standard input.

## Running tests

The tests text files are located on the `tests` folder. You can run them
by providing their path as an argument to the parser. As a stylistic choice,
Provol-One scripts are labelled with the .p1 extension. For example:

``` bash
$ ./bin/provolone txt/simple.p1
```

This should output:

```
Variable parsed: X.
Variable parsed: Y.
Variable parsed: Z.
Increment X parsed.
Command parsed.
If parsed (if Y).
Command parsed.
Increment Y parsed.
Command parsed.
If else parsed (if X).
Command parsed.
Increment Z parsed.
Command parsed.
For loop parsed (X times).
Commands parsed.
Zero-ing X parsed.
Commands parsed.
Increment X parsed.
Command parsed.
If parsed (if X).
Command parsed.
Attribution X = Y parsed.
Commands parsed.
While loop parsed (while Z is true).
Commands parsed.
Program parsed.
```

## Code Style Standard

* Indent with 2 spaces (configurable on text editor)
* Underscores may be added to improve readability
* Function and variables names should be lower case

``` c
double get_circumference (double radius);
```

* Constants names should be upper case

``` c
#define PI 3.1415f
// or
double PI = 3.1415;
```

* Open code blocks on the following line

``` c
if( get_circumference(radius) == 0 )
{
  exit(1);
}
```

* One-liners are allowed if to improve conciseness

``` c
if( get_circumference(radius) == 0 ) exit(1);
```

* Document functions as follow

``` c
// Opens file for read only access
// file_name - file relative path
// > file pointer, NULL
// [!] if an error occurs, file will not
// be opened and NULL will be returned
FILE * read_file (const char * file_name);
```

## Project Information

* [Hermann *(Course Supervisor)*](http://www-di.inf.puc-rio.br/~hermann/)
* [Statement *(in Portuguese)*](https://drive.google.com/file/d/185EW11LlP18a115te7fuPol0oz6TyTKs/view?usp=sharing)

## Software Dependencies

* [JFLAP *(Java Application)*](http://www.jflap.org/jflaptmp/)
